What's up guys? My name is John Evans and I have coached four of the current six individuals who have tested a 50-in vertical leap. Not only that, but I've also worked with hundreds of athletes who have tested over a 40-in vertical leap. And in this video, I'm going to tell you the exact blueprint to get a 40-in vertical leap. So, if you're wondering why you should listen to me over someone else, well, I essentially pioneered what vertical jump training is today. When I first started, I was one of the only people offering individualized progressive programs. My first athlete I ever coached, Austin Burke, went from making one-handers and windmills to punching e-space, doing inverters, and a ton of other dunks. Along with that, I've also coached Travis Slade to a 47-in vertical leap. Don Gonzalez is just on the cusp of hitting 50, and Josh has tested a 44-in vertical. Across all of those stories, there is one thing that has been consistently true, and that is that they trusted the process. They knew they needed a progressively overloaded program. They needed variety, individuality, and rest and recovery. Not only that, but they followed macrocycles that had six mesocycles inside of them, and I'm going to go over what those six mesocycles are in this video. Not only am I going to tell you what exactly those six mesocycles are, but I'm going to tell you what set and rep ranges you need for all of the lifts inside of each of those mesocycles, and I'm going to tell you how much dunking and jumping you should actually be doing. And lastly, I'm going to teach you how to put the program together so you don't blow up. This includes back pain, knee pain, Achilles pain. I have seen everything over the years. Now, I can't promise that you're going to get a 40-in vertical, but I can promise that if you trust me, you will hit your genetic ceiling. I've seen this happen with tons of athletes. This actually includes Nathan George, who when I first started coaching him, I thought there was no way in hell he would ever test a 40-in vertical. To my surprise, he ended up actually going even higher than that, getting his head to the rim at about 6'2. So, remember, if Nathan can do it, you definitely can, too. I tell guys this sometimes, but if I can't get you to a 40-in vertical, then I am 100% confident that no one else can. This comes from years and years of evidence, and I am 100% convicted when I say this. So, first, let's go over what a macrocycle is. In track and field, they essentially have 6-month periods, which we call macrocycles. The reason why this works out is because often times athletes will get their summer program and they will work for about 6 months into the indoor seasons, where they will peak. Then they have a brief deload period, then another 6-month period, and then peak for outdoor. That doesn't always work out that way. If you go really far into indoor, then maybe you only have 3 to 4 months, but I really like to function inside of 6-month macrocycles. I'll never forget Stephen Selly talking to me for the first time, and one of the things he said to me is, "John, why can't I just jump higher and higher every week? Why do I see these massive fluctuations?" And the reality is it's because your performance is a function of the fatigue and fitness model. What that means is that the higher the fatigue is, the higher your fitness level is, because you've pushed that adaptation, you've trained hard, and as a result, you're also going to have fatigue, and you're probably not going to perform super well. Fortunately, macrocycles actually take advantage of this, where we get these stacking adaptations on top of each other, and that is what I'm going to show you how to do in this video. I'm going to teach you how to potentiate each cycle sequentially, so you can max out your genetic potential. So, in month one, you are going to want to focus on volume building. During this period of time, you're going to have reps in the 8 to 12 rep range and sets anywhere from two to about five. You want your intensities to be about 65 to 70% depending on what the rep range is. And you're going to want to build in that deload in the fourth week. Throughout this, I'd recommend doing a lot of general work. Now, general work means that it does not mimic jumping closely. So, if you're a two-foot jumper, this means doing things like sumo deadlift or unilateral work. Whereas, if you're a one-foot jumper, this means doing things like deep squats and full ranges of motion. These things look less like the activity that you want to get better at. They mimic them less, but we're going to use this general preparatory phase to build on top of the things that we're going to work on in the future. I'd recommend training about 3 days a week. You're going to want to start with a power exercise. For those, you're going to want to have about four reps and five sets. This will increase the volume, which we will then intensify in the following cycle. Then, for the squats, you're going to want to be around that four to five set range, and again, you're going to want to be in that six to 12 rep range. The accessory work, I also like in that 8 to 12 rep range. Sometimes I'll even push it out to 14 reps depending on how fit the athlete is. Additionally, on the general days, which is going to be your Tuesday and Thursday, if you're lifting on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, you're going to want to have a number of different movements. The reason why is because we want to build variety into the training and make you an absolute unit. I like to tell guys that I want to take them from what is Bruce Wayne to Batman by the end of that 6 months. Following this, I typically like to intensify a little bit. Usually, what I'll do is I'll start moving into more specific work for two-foot jumpers. So, this means doing things like clean pulls and power clean. Sometimes I'll put snatch pull in there. Those are usually around six sets with about three to five reps at about 90% for the clean pulls or the power clean, and power cleans are going to be around 75 to 85%. The rep ranges on here are going to stay a little bit lower. So, if I was hitting four reps per set, now I might do about three reps per set. Total sets is anywhere from five to seven. You're going to start on the lower side of the set range and increase sets per week. Now again, if you're doing this on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, you can follow up the power work with some max strength work. At this point, I typically like to move in the six to eight rep range. I don't like saying hypertrophy or max strength or absolute strength, because it doesn't fit perfectly into the progression that I have. I like a fluid progression. Then, I'll typically do a little bit more specific work in my accessory work. This actually functions to prime the next cycle. So, at this point, I might actually move the reps down in some of that general work, maybe RDLs or calf raises in that four to six rep range, and move up the intensities upwards of 85% on the working sets. For the general work, I actually keep things a little bit more specific here, because it functions to increase the specificity on those general days without letting the specific days get too specific. Remember, if you're too specific or things mimic jumping too much, you're going to get hurt. What this usually entails is a number of bodybuilding circuits for the lower body and upper as well as some tempo running. I really like tempo running because it functions to improve body composition as well as the cardiorespiratory system. Now, in the third mesocycle, after you've done a month of the work that I just previously mentioned, you're going to want to move more into absolute strength. Again, I don't like to use those terms, but for simplicity, this is where you're going to want to be hitting things like 10 sets of three or 10 sets of two for back squatting. For power cleans, you're going to want to be pushing the percentages up quite a bit. I actually like to use clean pulls really heavily during this cycle because it is super complimentary to the max strength work. During these periods, I will be doing clean pulls at 105 to 110% of individuals power clean. This helps people get stronger in the first pull, as well as teaches them to apply a lot of force in that second pull, which makes the power cleans feel easier, which we're going to get into in the next cycle. So again, for the accessory work, a lot of the time I like to potentiate the following cycle. I kind of use this as a lead-in to the following cycle that you're going to do. So, if in the previous cycle you were doing absolute strength, in this cycle, I actually like to move into eccentric strength. So, for these, I might do things like Nordic hamstring curls. I might do things like two up, one down for the calf raise work. And this functions as a primer for the main lifts in the following cycle. When it comes to the general days, this is typically where I will put jump circuits in. I like to do it in sand for about 20 to 30 seconds and have a variety of jumps in there. It might be toe touch jumps, it might be tuck jumps, it might be single leg hops where you're spinning, but all of these function to add variety as well as volume and a level of specificity. At this point, I'll also make the tempo work on those days quite a bit harder. This means adding reps and adding sets to it. Typically, this is anywhere from 30 to 45-second runs with about a 3-minute rest. When you do those, you don't want your legs to feel absolutely lactic or painful. You want to keep them a little bit easier so that you increase your fitness level without adding too much fatigue. After you do this for about 3 weeks, you finish your third mesocycle, and you should be relatively strong. In the following cycle, I like to move bars fast. I found that clean pulls into power cleans is a great progression. So, during the fourth month, I really like to move the power clean up. I like guys to be hitting their absolute maxes during this period of time. be really strong from the clean pulls. Typically, I'll power clean twice a week and then have a clean pull day on the third day. This is also where I'll get more specific in my triple extension work. This means extension at the hip, knee, and ankle. So, if I do things like split squats, where it's with a safety bar, I'm holding onto the rack, lowering down with a supermaximal load, and then using my hands to assist me on the way up. I might do something like three build-up sets with normal split squats, and then three working sets of about three to two reps on those eccentric split squats. For back squat, typically, we will actually use the belt squat, have guys lift the other guy up on the ends of the belt squat, and this will assist them on the up phase, and then I'll have them lower more than they can lift up. This is called an accenturated eccentric, and it is one of the major determinants of jumping, which is eccentric strength. We know guys have to be super strong in eccentric strength, and as a result, I like to push these numbers up to about 110 to 115% of their maximal back squat. This is also where I will start to work partial ranges of motion in and get more specific in the ranges of motion. So, if I'm a one-foot jumper, maybe I'll pull from the blocks. If I'm a two-foot jumper, I'm going to pull more from the floor, and I'll be doing full ranges of motion. So, if that's your Monday, Wednesday, and Friday sessions, for the Tuesday, Thursday sessions, I actually like to get a little bit more general. So, it means I'm bringing things back like bodyweight circuits. I'm going to be doing general time circuits for bodybuilding circuits. I'm going to take out some of that tempo work, so your tendons feel better, your joints feel better, and I'm also going to pull out a lot of those jump circuits. This lets guys focus on the things that are really, really specific in the weight room, while also maintaining a lot of the fitness on those general days. Now, the accessory work, this is actually where I will start to focus on a little bit of elastic qualities. So, this means doing things like high velocity calf raises and high velocity RDLs. It might be like going into a drop RDL, where you're dropping down really fast and standing back up explosively, or doing things like bouncing calf raises. I'll typically keep the reps relatively low here, around five to six reps and the sets around two. I don't like to go much higher than that because I found that the overall neural fatigue tends to build up when you exceed those volumes. All right, so in month five, we are going to be focusing on bar speeds. We're trying to take a lot of the power that we developed in the previous cycle and move things faster. There's strength speed and speed strength, and if the previous cycle was strength speed doing really, really heavy power cleans, we're going to move it into speed strength doing things like power snatch and lighter power cleans. I also like to build hang power cleans into the cycle at this point. Again, I use the accessory work to prime the next month, and if we were doing really, really fast, bouncy stuff, we're loading that eccentric component really intensely and the stretch-shortening cycle, and I found that doing hang power cleans is a great way to build that into the Olympic lifts. Typically, I like guys to be super sharp on the OLIs. I want them to be moving bars incredibly fast. I want percentages around 60% for power cleans and power snatch I want about 50% of what they're doing in their power clean. For the squats, I typically like to blend max strength and high velocity work. I found that keeping a tent really really high on squatting can actually function to fry guys because the neural loading because the neural outputs are really really high and often times guys get super flat if you try to do both. So, often times what I'll do is a primer, maybe I'll go 5 4 3 increasing the intensity across those sets upwards of 85%. Then, I might do something like a high velocity squat where they're going down fast and up fast. I've even used a stopwatch and timed a set of five where they're putting about 65 to 70% on the bar and seeing how fast they can get through those five reps. Again, we're going to use the accessory work to prime the following cycle. At this point, we're typically moving into shock loading. So, often times this is where I will put things like med ball throws in or shot put throws overhead back between the legs forward. I'll also start to build in low plyo volumes. This could be stepping off a box, it might be step up jumps. I like to keep the variety high and I actually pull this from Boo Schexnayder which if you guys haven't seen that podcast, you definitely should watch it. On the general days, again, we're going to get more general because the specific work is getting more specific. We need to balance it out by making the general days even more general. So, again, if you're doing that on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday those OLIs, those fast explosive squats, and those plyos, the general days have to be easier. If you try to keep everything intense and specific at the same time, you're going to get hurt. primarily function as rest and regeneration days. Sometimes it'll be coming in doing some static flexibility, maybe doing some body weight circuits, or some core work, but it's not really going to be loading the legs. This is where I will completely pull out any jumping on those days cuz sometimes I'll have technical work or I'll have those jump circuits, but those are completely out at this point. It might even just be a barefoot run where they do a 100 m and walk back for 10 reps. So, in the final mesocycle or month six, this is where specificity is at its absolute highest. There are tons of different ways to do this. You could do a load management setup where you're jumping on a Monday and Thursday and then feel good lifting on Tuesday and Friday. Those feel good lifts are typically going to be slow squats, slow calf raises, and some RDLs. They're meant to be very very easy because specificity is at an all-time high as well as the volume of the specific work is at an all-time high. There are other ways where you can do this where you can build shock loading into the Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. I actually like to put sprints in pretty heavily during these periods and a lot of plyo volume. When I say a lot, I more so mean the intensity and variety. Typically, I keep the plyo volume relatively low across the year, but if I'm going to use plyos heavily, it's going to be in this sixth month. For the accessory work, it's actually now going to get more general. Again, because things are really specific, we're doing a lot of plyos, we're doing a lot of high velocity work, we need the stuff that's relatively non-specific to get increasingly non-specific or general meaning it mimics jumping less. This means doing things like concentric strength like regular RDLs and regular calf raises slow. It helps guys stay healthy and keeps their nervous system fresh and sharp. After you finish this entire six-month macrocycle, I typically like to taper guys. If you guys haven't seen my taper video, what I would do is decrease the volume by about 50% and increase the intensities. This means max effort jumping more frequently and keeping the volumes of the general work relatively low, but still trying to maintain it. I like 5 4 3 2 1 protocols in squats and really just daily maxing for velocity on the power clean. The last thing that I want to cover is the jump sessions. Now, earlier in the year, I like to keep the jump sessions very short. Typically, what I'll do is I will use about a 40-minute total time window and I will take the intensities of that total 40-minute time window and change them. So, for a guy like Dom in the first month, he might start with 35 minutes of low effort jumping and 5 minutes of max effort jumping. Then, in that second mesocycle, I'll increase the max effort jumps by about 5 minutes and decrease those warm-ups by about 5 minutes. So, you'd have 30 minutes of warm-up jumping and 10 minutes of max effort jumping. In the third mesocycle, again, I will do that shift where I'll take 5 minutes from the warm-up and move it into the max effort jumping. When I get to about 20 minutes of warm-up jumps and 20 minutes of max effort jumping, I typically cap it there. I found that if you increase the max effort jumping too much, guys get really really flat and then that Monday session is not good. All that said, if this was a lot to digest, which it probably was, then you can go to THPStrength.com and sign up for coaching where I will write an individualized progressive program where no cycle is the exact same. I've tested hundreds and hundreds of mesocycles using these principles over the last 15 years. In the process, I've helped tons of athletes jump higher which I mentioned at the beginning of this video including four athletes who have tested a 50-in vertical. Along with that, injuries are probably going to pop up which we are incredibly good at dealing with. We actually have a hired doctor of physical therapy on staff to deal with injuries that I might not be familiar with. This includes things like shoulders, ACLs, PCLs, and the meniscus. I hope that helped guys and I'll see you next time.