If you clicked on this video and you're doing the workouts, you're doing the pios, you're looking up programs online, [music] and you still can't dunk, then you're in the right spot. I know exactly how you feel. When I was in high school, I was 5'6, [music] 98 lb, riding my bicycle every single morning at 5:00 a.m. to my school so I could get early morning workouts in with the basketball team. I did this for literally 3 or 4 months in a row. And then the day finally came for tryyouts, [music] killed it, and the next morning I took that same bike ride. And when I looked at the door where they had that list of names for everybody that had made the basketball team, I scanned it up and [music] down. Nothing. I thought this was a mistake cuz I literally had busted ass at the tryyouts. But scanned it two times, three times. I realized my name was not on there. And literally, while my friends were there [music] seeing themselves make the basketball team, I was standing there dejected, sad, could literally feel the tears welling up inside my eyeball. I decided to join the basketball team as a team manager. That way, I could keep working out with the [music] team. and I love basketball and I could keep practicing and that was a way for me to practice with the best players in the school every single day, [music] work out with them and after a couple months I had asked the coach why he cut me [music] and he said it was because I was not athletic enough. Sounds ridiculous to say but I literally was not strong enough, couldn't jump as high as my friend and in his eyes would not be able to hang physically with highle high school basketball [music] players. What's funny is the turning point for me it didn't happen on the court. It didn't happen in the weight room. It wasn't some program or an exercise. It happened [music] in a computer lab. I had finished my assignment for my computer science class pretty early. And usually when I would do that, I would boot up YouTube and I would start watching just basketball videos. [music] And at this point, I did not know the pro dunking world existed. And there was this video that popped up from Hoop Mixtape and it was this 61 [music] white dude jumping over somebody and then dunking the ball backwards with both elbows in the rim. It was Jordan Kanan. And at that moment, my neurons were permanently [music] changed for the rest of my life. But it wasn't just seeing somebody do a dunk that was completely different [music] from anything else. I had grown up watching the dunk contest. It was my favorite night of the year, the NBA dunk contest. But this dunk was far and above harder, different looking, creative, required a vertical that I had never seen from any NBA player. So, I looked up Jordan's name on the search bar, found that he had a YouTube channel. And then on YouTube, you can categorize videos from oldest to newest, which if you want to go on a crazy trip and get some inspiration, do that with my channel. Just go to the oldest videos and just start watching them all. But I did that with Jordan. And something fascinating happened. One of the first videos was when he was around 15. I think I was around the same age and he could not dunk. You're telling me this guy who in my mind was instantly the best dunker had ever seen in the univer. He was at the same spot I was at. and that was all I needed. So hopefully that can be the inspiration, the spark that you need to start your dunk journey. And then you might be asking yourself, well, I'm not 16 or I'm not 6'. I have a company called THB and we train a bunch of different athletes, older athletes, basketball players, volleyball players. These are the before and afters. [music] And as these testimonials are playing on the screen, I'm going to try to explain to you something. Genetics plays a huge role in how high you jump. But getting better is under your control. Doesn't matter where your starting point is, you can improve that. Whether that means you have a 16-in vertical like Amouth, you can get to a 24-in vertical in less than a year, just [music] like he did, and he's still improving. Or if you're in your 30s and you have a 32-in vertical and you haven't trained in a while, you can get to a 36 37in vertical also in a year. So, you can improve. So, hopefully at this point, I have shattered whatever anchor, whatever shackles, whatever blindfold you have. You know, we're in the matrix now. You see behind behind the curtain. [music] you know you can improve. Now, I'm going to give you the blueprint on how to do that. We're going to split this into three phases. First, build the engine. Second, build the springs. And three, my favorite hack to supercharge [music] your vertical. So, first up, your engine. To jump high, you have to produce a ton of force. There is no getting around that. Your body is a [music] mass that you have to overcome in a fraction of a second. When you're under a heavy bar, your brain doesn't understand that you're weightlifting. It just thinks force. >> [music] >> thinks you're under threat. And this is what drives adaptation in your muscles, your nervous system, and your tendons to eventually be able to lift that weight so that in your mind's eye, your brain thinks it can survive the environment. To do this, don't over complicate it. Think of it as two phases. Hypertrophy, which is making the muscle bigger, and intensity, which is teaching your nervous system to use those bigger muscles more effectively to produce force. A very common error athletes make is they go from doing a lot of strength work cuz you see videos like this advise you to get stronger and they go from that to then just focusing on jumping. That is called block periodization and it is probably the worst type of periodization you can do. It's better than not periodizing. But there is a better way [music] to do it and that's by implementing variety into your training. Your body is smart. It will only adapt up to the point that it needs to to help you survive your environment and no more. The adaptations that we're creating are specific to jumping high. Variety allows your body to continue adapting so that you don't plateau. To bridge the gap between strength and dunking, you have to do the stuff in the middle. We call that surfing the force velocity curve. The force velocity curve is a relationship between force and velocity that was shown when looking at a muscle fiber under a microscope at different loads and speeds. In the weight room, the relationship is more with load and velocity. So, the heavier of a weight that you lift, the less speed you're going to be able to move it with. But you can categorize exercises roughly in that load velocity relationship and it is a good way to bridge the gap between max strength and jumping. Now, a quick point for all my short guys out there. If you're 5'9 or under, the shorter you are, the stronger you need to be relative to your body weight when compared to a taller athlete. If you're watching my videos and you're using me as a standard for strength to get a certain vertical, if you're shorter than me, have shorter legs than me specifically, you have to be even stronger than [music] me to reach a similar level of jumping. So, rule number one, you have to get brutally strong. I've never seen someone be too strong as long as you're still jumping regularly. I've literally [music] never seen it. Someone that's jumping at least once a week, I've never seen get too strong. Specifically in the muscles you use for jumping, your hips, hamstrings, calves, and your quads get extremely strong. This is the part that you can't skip. Now, phase two. Let's build the springs, baby. But what do I mean by the springs? By the springs, I mean your tendons and your nervous system. After I went down that rabbit hole on YouTube, I turned my driveway into a laboratory. I lowered my rim to a height where I could dunk. And I started jumping every single day for hours. Didn't matter if it was raining. Didn't matter if it was 100° outside. It didn't matter if it was 10:00 p.m. at night. If I got the urge to, I went outside and [music] done. I wasn't doing this perfectly periodized plyometric protocol, but I was doing the most specific pio for jumping higher. Max approach, [music] max effort jump, specifically dunking. The beautiful part about dunking is if you can't do it, you have to try as hard as you can to even get close to doing. Even if you're on a lower, if you're trying to do a trick dunk that you can't do, you have to jump as high as you can to give yourself the chance to be able to hit that dunk. And what that does is it creates intent. And this intent overloads the stretch shortening cycle. Stretch shortening cycle is a fast eccentric action followed by a fast concentric action. If you don't know what those two words are, look them up on Chad GPT until you understand it. What the stretch shortening cycle does is it auguments how much force you can produce. Your muscles can produce a certain amount of force. But when you lower and raise quickly, it produces more force, stretches the tendons, [music] stores more energy in that stretch tendon that is later released with way more energy than you would have been able to otherwise. And here is the beautiful part. The force that your body experiences in jumping [music] is way higher than anything else. Off one foot, you can see forces that are higher than 10 times your body. These forces is also why it's important to get strong in the weight room [music] in conjunction or else your body will go into what I call snap city. Shout out to the Hodge. And that's actually what [music] happened to me. I got knee pain when I was 15 years old and I was suffering with knee pain [music] until I was around 20 years old. And that's because I went straight into the jumping every day. Now, it got me good at dunking, but I did pay the price later on. If I could go back and give myself a piece of advice, it would be to listen to my body and to lift more, jump a little bit less frequently, or at least build up to that level of jump. So, the rule here for this phase is simple. Start jumping once a week and then do about 10% jumps and jump [music] volume each week. You can build up to doing up to two sessions. It's about what I see elite athletes be able to handle. If you're really young, you can handle three, four sessions per week, but it's important that you build up to this over the course of months. Meanwhile, doing the first phase, lifting two to three times per week. Now, remember, I told you that a common mistake guys make is go from [music] lifting to jumping. No in between. And this is where phase three comes in. My vertical jump hack. My favorite group of exercises in the entire world, the Olympic lifts. A lot of you guys think I'll just get my squat up and jump once or twice a week and I'm going to be able to dunk. Half of that is true. The thing that you're not taking into account is time. A squat takes a few seconds to complete. This exercise is called an isometric mid thigh pull. It's where you usually see the highest peak forces in a test and it takes around half a second to reach peak forces. Jumping, on the other hand, you're only on the ground for around 0.2 seconds. If you're a slow athlete, 3 seconds. And then if you're a one foot jumper, it's under 0.2 seconds. So, if you're very strong, but you're really slow at generating that force, then you're leaving inches of vertical on the table. By the way, some athletes are naturally stronger, but don't jump high. Other athletes can produce force very [music] quickly, but are very weak. Other athletes have really bad jump technique. Whichever one this is, you have to address that weakness [music] first. We call that vertical jump deficit training. And I've created a free six-week program to help you fix that deficit. If you want to take advantage of it, just click the link in the description or in the pinned comment below. On there, I'll explain how to find your deficit, then you can apply to get on a call with my team where if you put a deposit down, they'll tell you exactly how to fix that deficit in 6 weeks. And if your vertical increases by 2 in in those 6 weeks, you get that money back, essentially making the challenge free. Again, click the link in the description or in the pinned comment to take advantage of that. Now, if you do have this velocity deficit, you can't produce force very quickly. A perfect exercise to bridge that gap between jumping and max strength work [music] are power cleans. One of our athletes, Satiar Ferogi, he ran a huge study with over a thousand athletes, I believe, and the exercise that had the biggest correlation to your vertical in the weight room was the power clean. Nothing else even came close to beating it. Why is [music] that? One, the time it takes to do the double knee bend is almost exactly the same time as your ground contact time. The motor pattern of doing the first pull and then going into the double knee bend perfectly mimics the penultimate step going into your plant. And three, catching a heavy clean can overload you eccentrically. There is no sensation that feels like a heavy bar catching you and you just quite not being strong enough to get it up but still fighting it as hard as you can. That is where the adaptation occurred. Common argument is that they're too complicated. My rebuttal is that you're just a bad coach if you can't teach power clean. It takes me about 20 minutes to teach a power clean to somebody that's [music] a complete beginner with no fitness background. And another rebuttal is that you learn to learn by focusing on power cleans. It's a hard motor pattern, so it'll help you be a better athlete by learning it. You'll be able to learn things more quickly. And jumping is inherently [music] very complex. If you can't learn a power clean, good luck trying to fix your jump technique. Now, let's talk about what nobody wants to hear. How long is this going to take? The difference between the athletes [music] that get to 45 plus inches in their vertical versus the athletes that get stuck in the high 20s to low 30s. Not talent or genetics or your training program. It's who quits first. I've had multiple plateaus where my vertical didn't move from 2020 to 2022. A 3ear span did not PR my vertical. 2023 tore my IT band. But guess what happened at the tail end of both those periods of time. end of 2022. My first time setting the world record, 50.5 inches, after being stuck at 47 for three years straight. Literally never went past 47. I think I might have hit a 48 uh in 2020 actually. And then it dropped to 47 and just stayed there for 3 years. And in 2024, I measured the vertex and got a higher flight time on my 50.5 in test, a year, 1 year after tearing my IT band. And that vertical was hit 10 years after hitting my first dunk. And the only thing that has kept me going and still keeps me going is one [music] rule. You only fail if you stop. That's the only time you fail is if you quit on yourself. We just had a podcast with Mike Young, which is the guy who mentored my mentor, John Evans, and he told [music] us that he compiled a bunch of um of case studies of elite athletes, and what he saw for their highest marks ever, their PRs happen on average about 5 years after their squat PR and then about a year or two after a power clean PR. So you might not be pring right now, but if you're training, you're not getting worse. You can't train for a whole year and get worse. Your tendons are getting stiffer. Your nervous system is getting wired more efficiently. Your muscles are getting bigger. Then it's just about putting yourself in the right environment that's high adrenaline. You're unloaded. You're healthy. And when those stars align, you're vertical PR. Oh, if you're watching this and you don't want to do this by yourself and figure it out by yourself, click the link in the description or the bio again to do that deficit diagnosis [music] call. Or if you want to skip that and just sign up for my coaching, we are running a deal where you can get 6 months free if you sign up for the year plan. Literally half off if you get the year. Aside from that, guys, like the video if you found it helpful. Subscribe cuz I'm going to be making more videos like this in the future and I'll catch you guys next time. Peace out.