I am not a volleyball player, but I can get my waist [music] to a men's volleyball net. If you don't believe me, it's men's height. Look at this video. My reach is 81, and it was actually higher than my reach. So, a [music] net higher than regulation. I used to hold the world record for the highest approach vertical jump at 50.5 [music] in. I could touch 12 ft 3 1/2 in in the [music] air. And now, over 700 volleyball athletes trust me to write their vertical jump training. Based on polls we've taken, 80% of them come in with knee pain. Despite [music] this, the average volleyball player gains four inches of vertical in 6 months with one in five [music] athletes gaining 7 in of vertical in 6 months. That is not a typo. 7 in of vertical. [music] Why do so many volleyball players trust me with their training? It's because your success as a volleyball player [music] is largely determined by how high you can touch in the air. And in this video, I'm going to show you how to jump higher than all your opponents, all of your teammates by fixing one thing, giving you the right training that you need in the moment. There are a million exercises and programs that you can do [music] out there. Even just within THP, my coaching brand, we have overcoming ISOs, [music] accentuated eccentrics, max strength work, volume work, load management, heavy slow resistance training, [music] pio, sprinting. So, the question is, out of all those possibilities, what is the one you should be choosing that's right for you in this moment? And there's a reason why this matters so much for me. Back in 2017, I was [music] this close to quitting dunking for good. My knee pain was at its absolute worst. [music] I was having trouble just walking up and downstairs. I would actually walk downstairs backwards. That way, my knee wouldn't get loaded as much. [music] See, laziness wasn't my weakness. If I could, I would jump every day, be in the weight room every day, do pio. Jumping and training is [music] what I love. The problem is I wasn't doing the right training for me. And this is when I met this guy, John Evans. And John offered to coach [music] me to get rid of my knee pain. But he told me it would just be under one condition. I had to stop jumping and I could only jump. [music] And he said it was time to. This went against every fiber of my being because I had heard one [music] rule that I had stuck to when I was younger and I actually still stick to in this day. [music] The caveat being as long as I'm healthy and it was never go more than one week without jumping. But I was so tired of that knee pain that I was ready to listen. I was ready to do whatever it takes. So fast forward, didn't jump for 6 weeks. Yeah, my vertical dropped, but my knees got better after we implemented the heavy slow resistance training, the isometrics. Then later the plyometric [music] progression and my vert slowly started coming back and it never it never stopped. It kept going. At the time I was at a 42 inch vertical. John took me from that and knee pain to 50.5 in. And the lesson for you as a volleyball player. It's not about doing the best program out there. It's about doing [music] the right program for you. Let's get into it. Here's a typical path most volleyball players take. Step one, Google how to jump higher. Step two, you see a flashy thumbnail, 12-week program, crazy before and afters, and you decide to buy it. Step three, you run it for 2 to 4 weeks, results aren't as good as you expected, and you move on to Googling or YouTubing the [music] next program. The thing is, I get it. I used to be the king of googling stuff. I used to read forums, articles, I would buy books, I would buy programs just to see what's inside of them. And especially in today's [music] day and age, information is not the problem. Even just in my channel, you can go and watch every single video, but the problem isn't [music] information. There's actually probably too much information. Now, at this point, the issue is how do you [music] know you're listening to the right type of information? And then, how do you know that information is the best thing that applies [music] to you? Cuz there's a million things considered. What does your schedule look like? What's your injury history? What do you respond to best? What position do you play? [music] And if your training isn't addressing those things, it's a waste of time. So, where do you actually start? You start with something called a needs analysis. A needs analysis is simply just a set of questions you ask that's going to give you a direction of where to go with your training. And the first thing I always ask myself is, what hurts? And is there anything that hurts to the point that I can't train? And hint, if this is you, that's your bottleneck. That's the thing that you need to [music] address first. For example, for me, it was knee pain. Didn't matter how good the training I was doing. I could have been doing some miraculous training that would add 12 in to your vertical. [music] If I have knee pain, I can't do it. Not going to be able to benefit from it. Okay? So, start there. Then, you want to simply get some weight room numbers. How much do you weigh? What's your deep squat? What's your power clean? How much can you deadlift? And this is going to give you a good idea of where your max strength and more specifically your relative strength is. Then you can measure how elastic you are by getting your standing vertical, your approach vertical, and your RSI. Additionally, if you have a way to time it, get your 40 yard dash, your 10 m fly, and those are all going to be insights into your elasticity. And finally, how fat are you? What's your body fat percentage? We've talked to some of the best sprint coaches on the planet that have ever walked the earth in the last couple of months on our podcast channel, which by the way, if you want to subscribe to the podcast channel, link is in the description or in the pinned comment. And one of those coaches ran studies on the best sprinters in the world. And the best ones were on average around 7% body fat. So now you have all those stats. You then see if there are any outliers. Are any of them significantly worse than the other ones. This doesn't mean you have to be elite at one of them. Let's say you're healthy, your jump technique is good, your elasticity metrics are good, you have a big difference between your standing and running verticals, but then your max strength is below average. There's the gap. That's what you should focus on first. So that's what a needs analysis does. It gives us clarity on where your weaknesses are. Now, in order to write a good program to address that weakness, you need to understand what constitutes a good jump in volleyball, specifically a good two-foot jump. Here are six categories for creating a monster two-foot vertical. One is big, strong muscles [music] in the right places. That means your quads, your hips, and your calves. If your max strength is lacking, then you need to do 10 to 20 sets working addressing each of those muscle groups in the 6 to 12 rep range [music] and leave about 1 to two reps in the tank each set. Do that for a month and your max strength is going to skyrocket. And if that's your deficit, your vertical is also going to skyrocket. Two, you need an efficient nervous system. Once you've built some muscle, you need to teach your nervous system to use that muscle. That's where the heavy low rep strength work comes in. One to five reps, 80 plus% of your maximum intent on big compound movements like deadlifts, squats, lunges, hip thrust, calf raises. [music] This is where your brain learns to recruit more motor units faster with better timing. Three is your rate of force development. How quickly can you apply that force that you just developed on a twoft jump? Your window of time to produce force is 0.25 to 29 seconds. I want you to imagine two athletes. Both of them can squat 400 lb in a half squat. However, athlete A can produce 300 of those lb in 0.25 seconds. The amount of time you have for a twoft jump. Athlete [music] B can only produce 200 of those pounds in 0.25 in two 5 seconds. [music] Which athlete is going to jump higher? Athlete A. And if you're a beginner volleyball player, there is one lift that I want you to focus on to improve [music] this, and that is your power clean. Don't pay attention to any coaches saying power cleaning is a waste of time. Just do it. If you want an in-depth video of one of the best coaches on the planet explaining why power cleans are better than things like a barbell squat, jump or hexar jump, watch the podcast we just did with Mike Young. Again, link in the description or in [music] the pin comment. The fourth category, you want stiff, elastic tendons. Think of your tendons like rubber bands. [music] The stiffer they are, the harder it is to stretch, but if you do stretch it, the more energy it'll snap back with when you release it. In volleyball, your patellar tendon, Achilles tendon, and all the elastic tissue in your muscles [music] have to be able to absorb huge forces on your plant and then return all that energy back instantly. And that comes from having the right combination of strength work, power work, pio, and load [music] management. Which brings me to the fifth thing that you need to jump high off two feet, and that's health. If your knees feel like they're 70 years old, nothing I've said in this video even [music] matters. Step one is to always get painfree, or at least painfree enough where you can train and jump, [music] and the pain's not getting worse the next day. And then finally, the last thing that you need to jump high is [music] good technique. And the short version of it, good technique means you have very high velocity coming into your last two steps of a jump and you are low. These two things maximize impulse. Impulse is force times change in time. And there is a direct correlation between impulse and how high you jump. Now, I've made a ton of videos on technique and I'm probably going to make some more in the future. So, if you want to check those out, make sure to hit the subscribe button right now and like the video if you have found this helpful so far. So, now that you understand the ingredients of what makes a twoft [music] jump, the next thing to ask yourself is, what am I missing? We did touch on this earlier very briefly [music] with the deficit, finding your deficit. But here's the short version. If you're a beginner, get stronger. That is non-negotiable. And then obsess over learning good jump technique. If you're really strong, but you're not elastic, then you need to jump way more and you need to do a lot of power work and pio. If you're in pain, forget about everything else and focus on addressing that to the point where you can at least train with less than a three out of 10 pain in your [music] tendons. If you don't have any weaknesses that stand out, then you need to do a good [music] periodized jump training program that addresses all these things at the same time in varying volumes depending on the month. This is called long conjugate sequence systems and it's a style of periodization. Periodization is just how you plan your training so that you can keep stacking progress over days, weeks, months, and years. And so that you time it so that you jump high whenever you need to jump high while staying healthy. Now, if you're thinking, "This is a lot. I have practice. I have school. I have tournaments. I don't have time to worry about this and be a mad scientist and figure it all out and put them together in the right combination." Well, I have good news for you. That's literally all we do at THP [music] Strength. And it's not just me. We have John Evans who has written all the training programs in season, offseason stuff for back pain, muscle pulls, patellar tendon pain, Achilles pain, ankle rehabs, if you're strong, if you're fast, if you're slow, if you're fat. Matter of fact, we've written over 300 different training cycles. [music] And when you sign up, we're going to fit the one that suits your needs the best. We also have four coaches. [music] One of them's a volleyball player. Another one's a physical therapist. Another one is a dunker who got his first dunk in his late 30s and is still dunking in his 40s. And we have Austin, a 5'9 athlete with a 47 in vertical. You'll have access to all those coaches 24/7. You can literally ask them any question you have, send them videos for analysis, and they will [music] get back to you. They can even adjust your training around your schedule. If you get hurt, they can change the training so it addresses that injury. And if you feel like you need something else, you can talk to them, give them your reasons why. They can give you their input and then we can change your training. And the best part is in the first month, if your vertical does not improve or if you have knee pain and your knee pain does not go down in one week, you heard that right, one week, we will refund you your money back, no questions asked. So if you're a volleyball player that wants to jump higher, go to tbstrength.com. Link is also in the description or in the pinned comment. Now, I'm going to teach you the four laws that dictate every good training [music] program. The first law is the law of progressive overload. This law simply states that over time your training load has to go up. Training load is how much work you do and how hard that work is. You can up this number by doing more weight, more reps. Increase the range of motion. Decrease the rest period so that the density of work is higher. Shorten how much time you're on the ground for when you do pio. [music] Move weights with higher velocities over bigger ranges of motion. The possibilities are endless. But week to week, there needs to be some kind of progression. The second law is the law of variety. Your body adapts just enough to progress, then it stops. Your body adapts just enough to survive and then it stops. If you never change the exercises you're doing, the rep ranges, the tempos, the intensities, then you're going to stop progressing. Since I started training with John, I've actually never done the same training [music] week twice. That's seven years in a row I've been training with him. There's always some new or novel or slightly different training stimulus, even if it's small. An example of how we might do this with a clean pool, we might go clean pool month one, power clean month two, hang clean month three. Then we go back to max strength, but now we might do high clean pool [music] with a pause. We might add an e-om for the power clean. That's every minute on the minute in month two. And then month three, we might do hang clean with a counter movement to add more of an eccentric focus on the exercise. The third law is the law of specificity. Simply put, the more similar an exercise is to the thing you're trying to improve, which in our case is two foot jumping, the more transfer it's going to have. You have to practice what you want to be good at. Steph Curry didn't become the best shooter in the world by doing bicep curls. He did it by shooting the ball literally more than anybody else on the planet. What does this mean for volleyball? You [music] have to do a lot of approach jumps. And then in the gym, you need to pick exercises that use the same muscles [music] with the same ranges of motion with maximum intent with TPVS that mimic the ground contact time in a twoft jump. TPV is time to peak velocity. So in a power clean, for example, the TPV starts here when the hamstring is on stretch and the bar is right below the knee. And then the last frame is right when you're at toe off. And that TPV is almost the exact same as a two foot jumps. part of the reasons we love power cleans. And then four, you have the law of individuality. Everybody's different. Everybody's going to respond to different stimuli [music] in different ways. You are not your teammate. Your teammate isn't me, and I'm not the same as Donovan. The shape of your bones, the stiffness of your tendons, how much type one versus type two fibers do you have, injury history, training age, how well you respond to training, where your starting point is. Those are all different variables that come into play and all change how you respond [music] to training. That's why you can't just copy someone else's program and expect the same results. You have to tweak the training based on your specific needs and feedback from coaches. Now, let's talk about how you apply this to volleyball. There are two main archetypes of volleyball players that [music] sign up for THP. One is the young volleyball athlete, and two is the older, stronger volleyball athlete. There's actually a third archetype, which is the guy that's messed up from injuries, but that's beyond the scope of this video. If you're the first archetype, here's what I want you to do. Learn all the compound movements. Squatting, [music] RDL's, deadlifts, power cleans, lunging, and upper body wise, all your big pushing and pulling movements. Hit all of those two to three times per week. Again, do 10 to 20 working sets for each of those movements. [music] Then I want you to minimum jump at least once a week focusing on max intent and having good technique. Film all your jumps. Take a side angle where you can see the whole approach and then compare [music] it to an elite jumper that has your body type and your jumping style. If you're the second archetype, you need to be much smarter with your periodization. Every month, choose a focus and then that focus is what we call training to train. It should set you up for the next month. The order that I like doing things in are have a month where you focus on general work, big ranges of motion, high [music] reps, lower sets, and not a lot of jumping, pio, and power work. The second month, shift the focus on those same exercises to max strength. And then you can shift to doing more power work. Still keep pio [music] volume very low. In the third month, you want to decrease how many sets and reps you're doing of each exercise. Keep the weights heavy, but stay very far from failure. You can lighten the weights as well, but then focus on moving them fast. You're going to be doing a lot of power work here. And then during the last month, you want to do a lot of pio volume and then decrease all the volume everywhere else. I actually like to move my strength work back to general here. Similar to high volume strength work, but just half the volume. Like you want to be in the same reps roughly, [snorts] much lower sets. That way you can recover from the extra pow work that you're doing. That whole process is called a macro cycle. [music] During a second macro cycle, then I might play around with some more specific stimuli. for example, overcoming isometrics, accentuated eccentrics, [music] and more aggressive pio like high box step jumps. After each macro cycle, you essentially want to do a new needs analysis. How much higher are you dumping? Do you have any injuries that popped up? What's your strength looking like? And then build your next macro cycle based on [music] the weaknesses that that new needs analysis shows. Now, the last thing I want to cover for volleyball players, and probably the most important thing, is load [music] management. Most volleyball players schedule looks like this. You have practices four to five days a week. Then you have a tournament on the weekend. Then you have matches or tournaments on the weekend. Then what most volleyball players try doing is add an entire jump training program on top of that where you're training three days a week and trying to add jump days in there. This is basically a fast track to getting an overuse injury. What you want training to do is check the boxes that didn't get checked with what you're doing on the court. So think about all the buckets of training. your max effort jumps, your sprinting, your squatting, your hinging, your power work, and ask yourself, what am I not addressing here from volleyball? And then you want training to fill those gaps in. And then always ask yourself, is what I'm about to do going to make me feel better or worse tomorrow in terms of my tendon pain? And then week to week, you should be seeing your tendon pain either stay the same or decrease. [music] Staying the same is specifically for volleyball players that are in season because a lot [music] of times you can't play less. But offseason you should definitely be trending upwards [music] week to week in terms of your tendon health. That is it for the video guys. Hope you enjoyed it. Like the video if you did. Again you can sign up for training link in the description or in the pinned comment. Catch you guys next time. Peace out.